---
title: Three Essays on Urban Economics
bibliography: [prospectus.bib]
---

## Introduction: The "Spatial Turn in Economics"

This dissertation outlines a proposal for three essays on the themes of urban
growth, distribution, and land and housing policy in the United States. The
overall motivation of this dissertation is to understand how land rents affect
economic outcomes for those living and working in cities and regions.

The underlying framework of this dissertation comes from Lefebvre, who proposed
that "urban capitalism" is limited not merely to cities, but an entire
world-system of urban capitalist production relations. I tend to agree, in that
the process of urban growth and distribution is critical to understanding
capitalism in general in the both the developed and the developing world. 

In turn, spatial questions have become more and more centered in the study of
economics proper, even outside of the subfields of urban and regional economics.
The nagging persistence and expansion within and across sub-national regions
have become more and more obvious to questions of growth and inequality. 
For example, in the last few years luminaries like Jason Furman and Robert Solow
have weighed in on debates surrounding housing costs and declining inter-city
mobility. 

## Introduction: The Socio-Spatial Dialectic

Of course, while Economics is "discovering" space in Columbian fashion,
questions of space and hierarchy have remained centered in the domains of
history, sociology, geography, and many others. Edward Soja, to whom this
dissertation owes a good deal of credit, introduced the idea of the
socio-spatial dialectic: social relations are fundamentally co-determined by and
inextricable from spatial relations. This shows up as an unevenness of social
relations across different spaces and scales, as people shift from rural to
urban, urban to suburban, and neighborhood to neighborhood. The radical
geography tradition, beginning with Lefebvre, has always been concerned with the
social and spatial determinants of the right to the city, and this dissertation
is an attempt to integrate the insights of those disciplines into the field of
economic analysis. 

This dissertation is focused primarily on a subset of social-spatial relations;
the spatial relationship of land ownership, and its according social
relationship of land rents. Land and rents of course have a long history in
classical political economy, but in modern economic theory their peculiarities
have been relegated to the small subfields of agricultural, urban, and real
estate economics. Given the generalization of urban social relations, this
dissertation asks how the institution of land ownership functions to determine
the distribution of the social surplus product between capitalists, workers, and
owners of land. Who gets the benefits of "city-ness?"

## Introduction: Structure of the Dissertation

This dissertation is structured around three elements: Theory, History, and policy.
I will engage with questions of urban space and land rents from a Marxian
perspective.

Essay 1 will focus on the institution of land ownership and class of landlords
in developed economies. I will draw on the history of economic thought on land
rents and I will propose that rent is a form of distributive conflict over the
social surplus product, and will discuss the parameters of that conflict in the
form of a Marxian-Georgist model of urban growth and distribution.

Essay 2 will focus on the history and development of San Francisco in the
context of the growth of the technology center, real estate development, and
land rents. I will use descriptive statistics and GIS mapping to establish
growth patterns in urban wages and rents.

Essay 3 will be an empirical analysis of rent control. I will use a difference
in difference estimation strategy to compare growth in rents and housing supply
between rent controlled and non-controlled cities in New Jersey.

## What do landlords do? 

### Research Questions

There are three closely related questions that this essay seeks to answer. The
first is: To what extent are gains from public goods and productivity increases
captured by landlords? This question has a direct lineage to the ideas of Henry
George, who held that asset price increases in land ownership result solely from
external productive activities, and that any benefit accrued to landlords as the
result of asset appreciation and increased rents was in effect a direct transfer
of value from the productive sector to the land sector.

Second: How is this affected by the particular nature of urban growth? In
particular, I am interested in the interaction between land rents and returns to
scale and agglomeration that characterize urban economies. I conjecture that
under certain, likely common circumstances, increases in the housing supply that
result in increased density *reinforce* the Georgian agglomeration effect,
resulting in an *increase* in land rents rather than a decrease. 

Third: Putting it all together, what is the relationship between wages, profits,
and rents in an urban economy? When a city grows, how much potential profit is
passed to rents in the form of higher wages but higher costs of living? 

### Motivation

The Standard Urban Model, used by most mainstream urban economic work, argues
that rising rents are a supply side phenomenon resulting from constraints to
growth in the housing supply. This comes directly out of the assumptions of this
spatial general equilibrium model where consumers maximize utility such that
they are indifferent to changes in location, and producers maximize profit such
that *they* are indifferent to changes in location. 

Then, housing growth results in spatial mismatch between jobs and housing or
other housing supply constraints. Aside from biasing explanations to the housing
supply side, there are a few other drawbacks of this approach. It has difficulty
explaining neighborhood structure, or even the existence of neighborhoods in
general. It usuall assumes perfectly competitive land and housing markets, which
seems less and less plausible as density increases. It uses constant returns to
scale preoduction functions, which specifically exclude the production case we
are interested in here. Clustering only happens in these models because a
central business district or districts are assumed to exist *ex ante*. Finally,
land rents only exist in terms of *economic* rents, returns to scarcity, rather
than as a result of the institution of land ownership.

### What do landlords do

But what is rent, really? The textbook economic definitions are "an extra
payment for use of a resource by virtue of its scarcity", and "payment to a
factor of production in excess of that necessary to bring it into production."
The first one holds true with land-- I invite you to attempt to produce more
land as the price of land increases. It is not clear what the second definition
means in the context of land-- what is the marginal contribution of land to
production? As George would say, the value of *urban* land rests entirely on its
chance location in an area convenient for production or consumption, and not of
any special features of the bare land or landowner themselves. 

The transition from land-rent to economic-rent has therefore obscured the
distinctive features of land as a factor of production. This can be seen clearly
in the history of economic though: land-rent featured prominently in classical
political economy, but disappeared after John Bates Clark and marginalist
thinking became dominant. 

Of course, the classical economists engaged with land rents entirely in the
context of agricultural rents depending on the natural fertility of the soil. In
this essay, I hope to extend this analysis of rents to the case of urban
residential rents. 

### Land as a factor of production

The classicals saw land as part of a general class of non-produced resources.
Land is fixed in supply, and each parcel of land differs in its natural
productivity, in the case of agriculture. This is also true for the case of
residential rents, but for an entirely different reason that is at the heart of
this essay. 

Landlords are a subsumed class, to borrow the concept from Wolff and Resnick,
that engage in a subsumed class process. The fundamental class process, the
extraction of surplus value, necessarily exists in space; but in order to exist
in space, a payment must be made to the *owner* of that space. One of the
questions I attempt here to address is the class basis of landownership. Do
landlords act as a class? What are the mechanisms? Are they able to advance a
collective class interest? 

### Land in the urban context

Residential land has value only in the sense that it provides housing for 