
I. Introduction
===============

The following prospectus describes three dissertation essays focusing on
the political economy and economics of the school-to-prison pipeline in
the United States. The overall motivation for this dissertation is to
understand, given the context of neoliberal capitalism, how is it that
education- as institution assumed to be equalizing in society- has
instead contributed to the perpetuation and exacerbation of social and
economic inequality?

The school-to-prison pipeline trend is concurrent with the rise of mass
incarceration in the United States. The term school-to-prison pipeline
is used as a metaphor to describe how a rise in the use and severity of
school discipline can lead some students to experience an increased
interaction with the juvenile criminal justice system, thereby
increasing their odds of incarceration later in life. The students
affected by the school-to-prison pipeline are disproportionately
students of color, especially black students, at public K-12 schools.
The increased prevalence of zero-tolerance policies, as well declines in
public school funding, have both contributed to this trend. The
school-to-prison pipeline has coincided with changes in school
environments as well, such as the increased presence of police in
school, use of metal detectors, and use of other forms of electronic
monitoring and surveillance of students.

While the pipeline metaphor describes how school discipline becomes a
catalyst for imprisonment, a discussion of how school discipline deters
other outcomes and trajectories, such as college going, is also
important. For individuals, higher education is highly associated with
improved lifetime outcomes in employment, income, and health (Heckman,
Humphries, & Veramendi 2016). On a societal level, higher levels of
education also have vastly positive social benefits as well, in terms of
health, equality, productivity, and reduced crime and poverty (Moretti
2004).

The following essays develop a political economy approach to
understanding the school-to-prison pipeline in the era of neoliberal
capitalism, and investigate the links between features of the
school-to-prison pipeline and college-going.

In the first essay, I will use political economy as a theoretical
foundation to explore the relationship between the neoliberal era of
capitalism and the rise of school discipline and the school-to-prison
pipeline. Neoliberal capitalism is the specific institutional form of
capitalism beginning in the late 1970s, characterized by globalized free
markets, trends towards privatization of public goods, a limited role of
government in regulation and provision of public goods, and weakened
bargaining power of labor. I aim to demonstrate how neoliberal
capitalism as a specific institutional form has fostered the rise in the
use and severity of school discipline and contributed to the growth of
the school-to-prison pipeline. Using the *social structures of
accumulation* approach to characterize neoliberalism, I will describe
how schooling and school discipline has evolved under the institutional
forms associated with neoliberalism including: neoliberal ideas and
ideology (i.e. individualism, competition), privatization of public
goods, deindustrialization and re-segregation, and the rising influence
of the corporate sector on education. This analysis will provide a
political economy framework for understanding the evolution of the
school-to-prison pipeline, and the role of education more broadly under
neoliberal capitalism.

The second essay uses a quasi-experimental approach to examine whether
requiring students to disclose personal disciplinary records, such as
number of suspensions, impacts both the total number and the demographic
makeup of college admissions applications. In 2006, the Common
Application for college was introduced to streamline the college
application process for most U.S. colleges and universities. Unlike many
institution-specific admissions applications, the Common Application
asked applicants to disclose whether or not they had a school
disciplinary record. I exploit the timing of the introduction and
widespread adoption of the Common Application to set up a
difference-in-differences econometric model with the total number of
admissions applications received and the demographic mix of the
applicant pool as outcome variables of interest. By grouping colleges
that did and did not adopt the Common Application and colleges that did
and did not ask a school discipline question on their
institution-specific application prior to the adoption of the Common
Application, I can set up plausible quasi-experimental comparison groups
to estimate the effect of school disciplinary record disclosure on
college admissions application outcomes.

The third essay will use an econometric approach to examine how
*carceral schools* impact student expectations of going to college. A
carceral school is defined as a school that takes on prison-like
characteristics including police in schools, the presence of security
guards, the use of metal detectors, and the use of other forms of
electronic surveillance and monitoring of students. Over the past
several decades, these carceral schools have become increasingly common,
especially in urban areas, areas of higher poverty, and areas with
larger black and Hispanic populations. Carceral schools increase student
interaction with the police -- one of the conditions that can activate
the school-to-prison pipeline.

In this essay, I ask whether the environment created in carceral schools
negatively influences students' college expectations. Using data from
the National Crime Victimization Survey: School Crime Supplement, I will
investigate how attending a school that embodies the universal carceral
apparatus impacts student expectations that they will go to college. The
survey asks students to report whether or not they expect to go to
college after high school and whether or not they expect to graduate
from college. The survey also includes information on school safety
measures. To examine the impact that a carceral school has on college
expectations, I will do so by constructing an index of carceral schools
based on whether or not schools have police presence, surveillance, and
electronic monitoring. Then, using school-level fixed effects regression
approach, I will econometrically estimate the impact of whether or not
students attend a carceral school on student expectations of going to
college, controlling for important factors like family income,
education, and demographics. Since the survey data are available
biannually for 2001-2015, I can compare estimates across years to
understand whether or not this impact is changing over time.

Together, these essays serve to demonstrate both a broad understanding
of how the school-to-prison pipeline has developed and been fostered by
neoliberal capitalism, as well as to understand the individual level
impacts that the "pipeline" has for students' educational opportunities
and overall attainment. Understanding the school-to-prison pipeline
through the lens of political economy shows the deep structural roots of
mass incarceration, as well as zero-tolerance policies and school
discipline. Examining the relationship between aspects of the
school-to-prison pipeline, such as carceral schools and disciplinary
records, as impediments to college going illuminates how the
school-to-prison pipeline is self-reinforcing and has negative spillover
effects for all students impacted by these unequal and often
discriminatory policies and environments.

II: Schooling in Neoliberal America: A Political Economy Approach to Understanding the School-to-Prison Pipeline 
=================================================================================================================

Introduction
------------

The school-to-prison pipeline is a metaphor describing how public K-12
schools in the United States have fostered the growth in mass
incarceration through the increasing use and severity of school
discipline, leading to increased dropout rates, higher likelihood of
students interacting with the juvenile criminal justice system, and
higher likelihood of arrest and future imprisonment. The
school-to-prison pipeline has occurred alongside mass incarceration, in
which the United States prison population has grown substantially to be
the largest in the world (United Nations 2014). The growth in
incarceration in the United States has little do to with increasing
rates and severity of crimes, but rather is the result of changes in
state and federal policy, as well as income inequality and lack of
social services for issues like mental illness (Raphael & Stoll 2009).
These policies in the state and federal criminal justice systems mirror
the zero-tolerance policies implemented by many school systems since the
1990s, which increase the use of school discipline, particularly the use
of out-of-school suspension, expulsion, and referral to the juvenile
criminal justice system. These forms of discipline are all highly
associated with increased likelihood of being arrested and imprisoned
either while in school or later on in adulthood. The astounding growth
in incarceration in the United States raises many questions about how
inequities and discrimination the schooling system and the use of
discipline drive mass incarceration.

Concurrent with mass incarceration and the rise of the school-to-prison
pipeline, the United States as a capitalist economy has experienced
institutional restructuring to *neoliberal capitalism*. Neoliberal
capitalism- or neoliberalism- describes the institutional restructuring
of the capitalist system towards more prevalent global free markets,
limited role of government, increased privatization of public goods, and
so on. This restructuring is vastly different from the regulated form of
capitalism preceding neoliberalism, which included the development of a
welfare state, regulated markets, and cooperation between capital and
labor via the capital-labor accord, in the post World War II era through
the 1970s (Kotz & McDonough 2008). Within the Marxist literature, many
argue that the school system in the United States is shaped by
capitalism, and plays an important role in socializing students to be
productive workers in the context of capitalism. These analyses however
were done during the regulated era of capitalism. In this essay, I will
show how neoliberalism as a recent institutional form of capitalism has
promoted changes in the education system in the United States. I will
then evaluate the descriptive empirical evidence of how these changes
have fostered the growth of the school-to-prison pipeline through the
proliferation neoliberal ideology, privatization, deindustrialization
and resegregation, and the rising influence of the corporate sector in
public schools. This essay provide a contextual framing for
understanding the school-to-prison pipeline, and will show the
structural context of how changes in the capitalist economy influence
inequities in the public school system, which reinforce racial and
class-based social inequalities.

*Background: Capitalism & Education *

In *Schooling in Capitalist America*, Bowles and Gintis note that the
American schooling system is innately embedded in the structure of the
American economy (Bowles & Gintis 1976). This means that schooling is
embedded both within capitalism as well as within other
institutionalized forms of oppression including but not limited to white
supremacy, patriarchy, and ableism. Thus, even though schooling is often
presented as neutral and equalizing, it can actually serve to perpetuate
social and economic hierarchies and divisions.

Like schools, prisons also serve a particular function in a capitalist
economy. While prisons are commonly thought to serve the function of
punishment and rehabilitation of those deemed criminals by society, mass
incarceration calls into questions what the role of prisons are in a
society where such a large portion of its population are incarcerated.
In *Are Prisons Obsolete?* Angela Davis argues that the rise of mass
incarceration -- which has particularly affected black Americans
(especially males) -- can be attributed the intersections of capitalism
and white supremacy. She argues that in a capitalist economy, mass
incarceration serves the purpose of storing and managing surplus labor
in order to maintain the capitalist and white supremacist order, and
fuel capitalist profit interests (particularly in the for-profit prison
sector)(Davis 2003). Loïc Wacquant (2001) argues that mass incarceration
is in part the result of a "racial and class backlash" beginning in the
late 1970s against the social progress of the Civil Rights Movement and
other social movements that occurred in the previous era of regulated
capitalism.

Both Davis and Wacquant connect declining labor market conditions for
black Americans and the declining welfare state to the need to
subordinate and control those who are unemployed or marginalized out of
the labor market via incarceration. The specific institutional changes
of neoliberal capitalism are deeply interconnected with this analysis,
particularly in the erosion of the welfare state and spatial changes in
production leading to stagnating labor markets. Following this analysis
then, the school-to-prison pipeline, which largely feeds mass
incarceration can be seen too as the result of the intersections of both
white supremacy and the economic changes associated with neoliberal
capitalism.

Under neoliberalism, schooling may serve new purposes in the economy,
particularly in its relation to mass incarceration. In their work on
*Schooling in Capitalist America*, Bowles and Gintis (1976) show how the
school system reflects and corresponds to many developments in the
capitalist system. According to their analysis, schools subordinate and
discipline students, thereby socializing them as future workers in the
capitalist hierarchy. They describe how schooling instills capitalist
values such as competition, rewards, punishment, and hierarchy. Bowles
and Gintis however describe the classroom as they wrote in the early
1970s. Their observations and analysis of schooling were made during the
previous period of regulated capitalism occurring after WWII and through
the 1970s. Since the 1970s however, the neoliberal era of capitalism has
developed. As the economy has undergone institutional changes, schools
have undergone many reforms and new trends in their organization as
well. Since the writing of *Schooling in Capitalist America* many new
forms have swept the American public school system including the rise of
charter schools and privatization, school voucher programs, school
choice programs, reliance on high-stakes testing, and the implementation
of zero-tolerance policies with increasingly severe and frequent use of
school discipline. All of these trends, in one way or another, have
contributed to the school-to-prison pipeline trend.

*SSA Framework & Defining Neoliberalism*

The *social structures of accumulation* (SSA) approach is a method of
identifying and analyzing developments and changes in the structure of
capitalist economies. SSA theory builds on traditional Marxist theory
that defines a set of institutions supporting a stable system of capital
accumulation for a capitalist economy. As capitalism develops, the
internal contradictions of the system lead to crisis. These crises then
eventually result in new restructuring of institutions to ameliorate the
crisis and stabilize capital accumulation.

Neoliberalism is a specific institutional form of capitalism, emerging
out of the contradictions of the previous institutional form of
regulated capitalism. Regulated capitalism emerged in the post-war
period through the 1970s, and was characterized by the presence of a
welfare state, the capital-labor accord, regulated markets, and
co-respective competition between large firms. The SSA approach
identifies the key features distinguishing the institutions of
neoliberal capitalism from that of capitalism prior to 1979. Unlike the
regulated era, neoliberal capitalism is marked by its own unique
institutions, which aid in capitalist accumulation and stabilize the
internal contradictions of the capitalist system. These institutions
include the dominance of neoliberal ideas and ideology (i.e.
individualism, competition), globalization, a change in the role of
government, a more thorough domination of labor by capital, and change
in the corporate sector (Kotz 2015).

Kotz and McDonough (2008) describe the neoliberal social structure of
accumulation as having trends towards liberalization, privatization, and
stabilization. Two of those trends- liberalism and privatization- apply
directly to the changes taking place across the public schooling system
(while stabilization refers more to macroeconomic stability via monetary
policy). There are specific domestic institutional changes that also
characterize the neoliberal era including weakened unions, flexible
specialization in the labor process, spatialization (i.e. shifts in
production location, deindustrialization), reduction in social wages
(i.e. state pensions, unemployment insurance, etc.), shifts in the
financial burdens of paying for public services, private outsourcing of
public contracts, and increasingly repressive forms of social control.

The social structures of accumulation approach can in part help to
explain the rise of school discipline and the school-to-prison-pipeline
phenomenon under this new institutional form of capitalism. For this
essay, I will use Marxist theory, historical research, and empirical
evidence so show how neoliberalism has fostered the growth of the
school-to-prison pipeline, thereby contributing an analysis of the role
of schooling updated to the present-day context of neoliberal
capitalism. To do so, I will investigate several important questions
such as: why has the function of schooling shifted away from cultivating
a productive, yet subordinate workforce, and towards exclusion and
incarceration since the 1980s? What events and policies led to these
particular changes, and whose interests do these changes serve? For
understanding the role of and changes in schooling during the neoliberal
period, I will focus on how these changes uphold and are reinforced by
neoliberal ideas and ideology, changes in the role of government, and
the influence of the corporate sector on K-12 education in the United
States.

Political Economy Methodology
-----------------------------

To investigate the relationship between neoliberalism and the
development of the school-to-prison pipeline, I will survey the existing
literature, examine historical documents such as legislation and
periodicals, and investigate descriptive empirical evidence to
understand how neoliberalism has fostered, and in some cases directly
resulted in, the rise of the school-to-prison pipeline in the United
States.

For descriptive empirical evidence, I will evaluate literature on
national data that demonstrates trends that may support the theoretical
hypothesis that neoliberalism has fostered the school-to-prison
pipeline. Recently, the Department of Education began tracking
information on school discipline, school interaction with the juvenile
criminal justice system, and the presence of police in schools. The
School Climate and Discipline initiative of the Department of Education
offers a public-use dataset for the Civil Rights Data Collection data
with school-specific details on discipline. These data are collected at
the school-level, and contain data on demographics, use of in-school and
out-of-school suspensions, students with disability status, and
expulsions (Department of Education 2015). Further important data for
descriptive empirical evidence should show trends in privatization and
the rising number of charter schools, overall levels of federal and
state funding to public schools over time in the neoliberal period, and
track the prevalence of school choice and voucher programs.

To analyze specific changes in law and government programs, I will
examine key pieces of legislation and initiatives from the Department of
Education. The Gun Free Schools Act of 1994 is often cited as a key
catalyst in the school-to-prison pipeline trend as well as attributes to
the rise in increasingly severe and frequent use of school discipline
(Skiba & Knesting 2001). The Act was responsible for introducing
zero-tolerance policies into schools, and was a part of the Improving
America's School Act of 1994. High-stakes testing, which is often
corporate driven, as well as the introduction of new accountability
practices were brought forth by the No Child Left Behind Act of 2001
(Figlio 2005). Later, the Race to the Top program- a grant program for
public schools- was introduced by the Department of Education in 2009,
which rewarded created competition between state for federal funds in
exchange for increasing accountability, adapting Common Core standards,
increasing academic performance as measured with standardized testing,
turning around lower performing schools, and measuring teacher
effectiveness. The initiative along with Common Core standards heavily
influenced by corporate donors such as the Bill and Melinda Gates
Foundation, and supported development of charter schools (particularly
for turning around poor performing schools) (Washington Post 2015).

By presenting descriptive empirical evidence on school discipline and
climate, privatization, and corporatization, as well as the historical
pieces of legislation and government initiatives shaping these trends, I
can demonstrate the proposed theoretical relationship of how the
neoliberal institutional structures of ideology (including competition,
accountability, exclusion, and oppressive social control), privatization
of public goods and services, and the influence of the corporate sector
have contributed to the school-to-prison pipeline trend. Further,
through citing case studies and existing literature, I will additionally
show how issues of deindustrialization, alongside tax revolts, have
contributed to regionalized issues of school resegregation and how these
trends foster the school-to-prison pipeline

Neoliberalism & the School-to-Prison Pipeline
---------------------------------------------

The following describes how I will analyze the links between neoliberal
institutions and the school-to-prison pipeline. I will examine the
prevalence of neoliberal ideology, privatization of public schools,
deindustrialization and resegregation, and the influence of the
corporate sector.

### Neoliberal Ideology

Neoliberal ideology emphasizes the values of free markets, competition,
accountability, individualism, as well as private property. Free market
ideology has distinctly influenced the trend towards school-choice and
vouchers, creating distinctly unequal and arguably resegregated school
systems throughout the country (Rothstein 2013). Competition has
encouraged the rationing of access to quality schools, and competition
amongst schools. Accountability permeates the discourse on high-stakes
testing introduced through the No Child Left Behind Act, and the
rhetoric of linking school funding (and sometimes even teachers' tenure)
to the performance of schools -- holding teachers and individual
institutions accountable, instead of the entire system itself.

Individualism, while represented by modern schooling for many decades
through the uses of grades as well as punishments, is embodied in the
emphasis on individual student outcomes, and the individualistic focus
on both merit and individual delinquency of students, rather than of the
institutions themselves. Emphasis on individual delinquency also drives
the tendency to exclude students through the use of school discipline
(i.e. out of school suspensions) and the juvenile criminal justice
system, rather than encouraging restorative justice and guidance. The
neoliberal approach to schooling and school discipline specifically
focuses on exclusionary practices, rather than restorative justice.
Kupchik and Monahan (2006) argue that shifts in social relations have
given rise to new regimes of social control in the American education
system, in the form of increased surveillance of students and increasing
use of school discipline, which is often outsourced to the juvenile
criminal justice system (see also Kupchik 2010).[^1]

The persistence of neoliberal ideology in American schooling has perhaps
culminated with the recent appointment of Betsey DeVos as head of the
Department of Education -- an individual with no experience in public
schools and vested interests in school privatization as well as
for-profit higher education. I plan to analyze the influence of
neoliberal ideology on public schooling by demonstrating its prevalence
in high-stakes testing (implemented through No Child Left Behind),
increasing school discipline and social control of students
(surveillance and monitoring), privatization (through vouchers, school
choice, and charters), accountability, and competition

### Privatization: Vouchers, School Choice, & Charter Schools

In their analysis of the history of education in the United States,
Goldin and Katz (2010) show that the development of free, compulsory,
public schooling was one of the most important developments of the
"golden age" era of American education in the 1910s and 1920s. But,
within just decades of the development of a high quality free public
schooling system in the U.S., discussions of school privatization began
in the economics field. One of the earliest proponents of school
privatization was economist Milton Friedman. In his essay on *The Role
of Government in Education*, Friedman first proposes the idea of
vouchers and school choice, arguing against the government's role in
administering schools in what he called a free-enterprise society
(1955). Later, other neoclassical economists and others argue for the
free market approach to schooling (i.e. allowing students to choose
schools as customers, and market forces of competition between schools
increasing efficiency and quality) by advocating for school choice,
voucher systems, and privately operated yet publically funded charter
schools (Budde 1988, Hoxby 2003a, Hoxby 2003b).

Recent research suggests that charter schools may disproportionately
discipline students using school suspensions, and these trends
disproportionately impact students of color and those with disabilities
(Losen et al. 2016). A particularly controversial case of a charter
school engaging in disproportionate school discipline directed at
students of color, especially black students, occurred in Malden,
Massachusetts. The Mystic Valley Charter School disciplined students for
wearing hair braid extensions, which clearly discriminated against black
students at the school (Fox 2017). While the policy was ultimately
suspended after intervention from the state Attorney General, these
sorts of policies set by independent schools contribute to the
disproportionate discipline of black students and students of color.
Disparities in school discipline are one of the main drivers of the
school-to-prison pipeline, and are likely to be exacerbated by
independent schools and trends towards school privatization.

Several efforts to reform, and in effect privatize, public schools have
occurred over the past two decades including the implementation of
school choice and school voucher systems, as well as the rise of charter
schools in the public sector. For this essay, I will document the scope
of this trend using descriptive empirical evidence, and evaluate the
effectiveness of these reforms. I will also link these trends, which
often create great inequality between schools and districts, to the
school-to-prison pipeline, especially for schools bearing the costs of
these reforms in terms of underfunding, concentration of poverty, and
other resource constraints.

### Deindustrialization and Re-segregation

Kotz and McDonnough (2008) describe spatialization as a key feature of
neoliberalism. Spatialization describes the new geographic patterns of
economic production. These spatial changes contribute to regional trends
of deindustrialization, particularly in the urban centers of the Rust
Belt in the United States. William Julius Wilson documented the
racialized impacts of the changing spatial locations of production in
*When Work Disappears: The World of the New Urban Poor*. In this work,
Wilson shows how deindustrialization and skills mismatch have played a
large role in the development of racialized urban poverty in America,
and the long-term impacts of prolonged joblessness in deindustrialized
areas (Wilson 1996). Though some claims were controversial in putting a
higher significance to these economic factors rather than on
discrimination and structural racism, Wilson clearly linked the ways in
which deindustrialization has had disparate impacts on communities of
color. Michelle Alexander in the *New Jim Crow: Mass Incarceration in
the Age of Colorblindness* connects how deindustrialization impacts mass
incarceration (2012). As employment opportunities left urban cities, the
incentives to sell illegal drugs, such as crack cocaine, increased. Lack
of employment opportunities marginalized many black communities out of
the formal economy. According to Alexander as drugs and unemployment
bombarded urban centers, there also began a backlash against Civil
Rights in the form of the War on Drugs -- a policy largely responsible
for the growth in incarceration in recent decades.

Rising inequality due to unemployment and poverty has contributed to the
re-segregation of American public goods. Evidence shows that schools are
today more highly segregated than they were in 1963, in large part due
to "white flight" from urban communities following the flight of capital
and jobs (Rothstein 2013), and important questions remain regarding the
whether capital left first or followed individuals who moved. Rothstein
( 2013) shows that resegregation was often achieved through deliberate
public policy decisions, such as redistricting.

Given these dynamics, the question for this essay is: is there a link
between deindustrialization, rising urban poverty, and the
school-to-prison pipeline? Has deindustrialization fostered the
school-to-prison pipeline, as well as mass incarceration, and how so? To
answer these questions I must investigate and document how
deindustrialization has impacted school systems in these areas, and
whether or not it intensifies trends of privatization, zero-tolerance
policies, involvement of the juvenile criminal justice system in
schools, and other key attributes of the school-to-prison pipeline.

### Influence of the Corporate Sector 

The corporate sector has also had increasingly profound influence on
both school privatization efforts and within many other aspects of
school reform, including curriculum development and materials. While
Race to the Top officially called for adoption of common curriculum
amongst schools, the initiative specifically pushed the Common Core
standards. The Common Core standards however were largely influenced by
the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, which privately funded the
compilation of the standards. Corporate influence can also be seen in
other areas of schooling including materials and textbooks, standardized
testing, corporate-run charter schools, corporate lobbying of
educational reform, and so on. There is historic evidence for the
growing influence of the corporate sector on education policy decisions.
For example, the CNN archives document that IBM Corporation organized an
Education Summit in 1996, to discuss the future of school reform in the
United States. Corporate leaders and governors all attended these
summits, but near absent from these discussions were students and
teachers (CNN 1996). In my research, I will investigate further
documentation of these summits, both in the 1990s and earlier.

To understand the growing role of the corporate sector in education, I
will use empirical research to show the growing interconnectedness
between public schools and the corporations providing grant money,
materials and books, and creating the classroom curriculum standards. I
will also investigate the extent to which corporations influence and are
a part of the charter school movement. An important way to look at
corporate influence will be to document the level of corporate lobbying
for school reforms, such as vouchers, choice, charters, curriculum, and
high-stakes testing. I will then investigate linkages between school
privatization and corporatization, and the "schoolhouse to jailhouse"
track. Do charter schools, either directly or indirectly, influence the
increased use of discipline and reliance on the juvenile criminal
justice system?

Contribution
------------

Kupchik and Monahan (2006) argue that increasing school discipline in
recent decades serves the purpose of socializing students for what they
called "post industrial discipline". They argue that schools now
socialize students for a new set of oppressive social relations based on
increasing social control, surveillance, and incarceration. Garcia and
De Lissovoy (2013) also demonstrate how the school-to-prison pipeline
can be considered as a "hidden curriculum" to prepare students for
incarceration rather than participation in the economy. In my research,
I will show that neoliberal institutions have fostered the growth of the
school-to-prison pipeline, while new carceral school environments also
embody and reinforce neoliberal values and ideology. This essay will
demonstrate how neoliberal ideology, privatization of public goods and
services, and the increasing role of the corporate sector have promoted
trends of increasing school discipline and the school-to-prison
pipeline, providing a broader political economy context for the analysis
of these trends. This theoretical analysis and the descriptive empirical
supporting evidence will illuminate how in the context of neoliberal
capitalism alongside racism and ableism, the equalizing institution of
education exacerbates social and economic inequalities through the
school-to-prison pipeline.

**\
**

III: Does School Discipline Impact College Admissions? Investigating the Effects of Disclosing High School Disciplinary Records 
================================================================================================================================

Introduction 
-------------

Since the 1980s and 90s, the use and severity of school discipline has
been on the rise in the United States, resulting in negative impacts for
students who experience suspension, expulsion, and other disciplinary
measures. Increasing use and severity of school discipline is associated
with the phenomenon of the school-to-prison pipeline. At the K-12 level,
this is characterized by trends towards increased disciplinary measures,
the rise of zero-tolerance policies, and increased reliance on police to
deal with behavioral and disciplinary issues in public schools (Skiba &
Knesting 2001; Heitzeg 2009). These policies criminalize school
discipline and disproportionately impact students of color, especially
black students, and those from poorer socioeconomic backgrounds. (Skiba,
Arredondo, & Williams 2014; Skiba et al. 2002) The
school-to-prison-pipeline is called such, since it creates unprecedented
pathways in which students are disciplined in schools, and end up in the
juvenile criminal justice system, dropping out, or incarcerated later in
life.

School discipline however has many other spillover effects beyond just
increasing the risk of incarceration on students and their lifetime
trajectories. Research shows that experiencing school discipline has a
negative impact on student achievement and educational attainment. In
this essay, I will examine the relationship that school discipline has
on college applications and admissions for students who have a
disciplinary record. I will use the introduction of the online Common
Application for college admissions, which asked students to disclose
their school disciplinary records, as a policy intervention. With this,
I can examine the impact that disclosing school discipline has on the
how students apply to college, and on admissions rates at colleges and
universities. This research will illuminate an important negative
spillover effect that school discipline can have for students applying
to college.

Understanding School Discipline & Its Impacts 
----------------------------------------------

The school-to-prison pipeline describes how increasingly frequent and
severe use of school discipline, especially out of school suspensions
and expulsions, leads students to be more likely to drop out of school,
be arrested, and be incarcerated. The school-to-prison pipeline is
innately linked to *mass incarceration*- the trend in rapidly increases
in imprisonment the United States since the 1980s, creating the largest
prison population in the world (United Nations 2014). Raphael and Stoll
(2009) show that the growth in incarceration in the United States has
little do to with increasing rates and severity of crimes, but rather is
the result of changes in state and federal policy, as well as increasing
income inequality and lack of social services. Changes in state and
federal policy, such as California's Three Strikes Sentencing Law, have
intensified and lengthen prison sentences (Stoll & Raphael 2009). These
policy changes in the state and federal criminal justice systems mirror
the zero-tolerance policies implemented by many school systems since the
1990s. Schools similarly deal with constrained resources for dealing
with student behavioral issues and often rely on discipline, such as
suspension or expulsion, or the juvenile criminal justice system to
manage these issues. The age of mass incarceration, beginning in the
1980s and intensifying throughout the 1990s and 2000s, has brought
forward questions about how inequities in the schooling system lead the
school-to-prison pipeline -- that is the tendency for school policies to
lead to students interact with the juvenile criminal justice system and
later face incarceration.

At the K-12 level, the school-to-prison pipeline phenomenon is
characterized by trends towards increased disciplinary measures, the
rise of zero-tolerance policies, and increased reliance on police to
deal with behavioral and disciplinary issues in public schools (Heitzeg
2002). These policies encourage more widespread use of school discipline
and disproportionately impact students of color, especially black
students, and those from poorer socioeconomic backgrounds (Skiba et al.
2002). The school-to-prison-pipeline is called such, since it creates
unprecedented pathways in which students are disciplined in schools, and
end up in the juvenile criminal justice system, dropping out, or
incarcerated later in life.

Zero tolerance policies, a term first coined in the 1980s, refers to
strict disciplinary procedures tied to student behavior and violations
of school conduct codes. The policies gained momentum in the 1990s after
the passing of the Gun Free Schools Act of 1994, motivated by calls to
increase school safety (Skiba & Knesting 2001). These policies influence
increasingly strict discipline for students in violation, and often
outsource school discipline to the juvenile criminal justice system. The
increased prevalence of strict disciplinary measures, like out of school
suspensions, actually increases the likelihood of students reoffending
or engaging in criminal activity outside of school (Cuellar & Markowitz
2015). These disciplinary codes are not limited to violent misconduct,
but often extend to nonviolent violations, such as dress codes or
talking in class (Morris 2015). Students experiencing these forms of
discipline are more likely to be disciplined again, drop out of school,
or be incarcerated in the future (Shollenbger 2013; Skiba et al. 2006).
School discipline is one of the main drivers of the school-to-prison
pipeline, referring students to the criminal justice system instead of
other social services. Further, there is little evidence that school
discipline is an effective deterrent for misbehavior, and instead school
discipline disrupts students' academic achievement and makes them more
likely to engage in further misbehavior or criminal activities, creating
a vicious circle of structural inequality (Cuellar & Markowitz 2015,
Mendez 2003).

A recent report for the Department of Education outlines stark
disparities in punishment faced by black and minority students in the
public school system (Department of Education 2016). At all age groups,
black students are three times more likely to be suspended than white
students. Even at the preschool level, black students represent 18% of
enrollment, but 48% of suspensions. Roughly 82% of these children are
suspended multiple times. Further, while boys receive the majority of
suspensions, African American girls receive suspensions at a higher rate
than girls of any other background, at a rate of about 12%. Even more
concerning, black students are disproportionately arrested and referred
to law enforcement in school. Black students represent about 16% of
enrollment, but 27% of those students referred to law enforcement and
31% of those subject to school-related arrest. The report also shows
that students with disabilities are also disproportionately more likely
to be disciplined. These findings illustrate the striking ways in which
school disciplinary tactics and institutionalized racism, as well as
ableism, intersect to create the school-to-prison pipeline, leading to
greater rates of incarceration and lower rates of graduation.

The trend of increasing discipline and increasingly outsourcing school
discipline to the juvenile criminal justice system is attributed both to
the broader societal trend of mass incarceration as well as to more
localized school reforms. One study shows the increased severity and
frequency of punishments in schools to be highly correlated with the
introduction of higher stakes testing policies, like the No Child Left
Behind Act. The authors show that, on average, lower performing schools
tended to assign harsher punishment, and the frequency of punishments
increased during testing periods (Figlio 2005).

There are a few studies that begin to explore the role that school
discipline has had on college going. Shollenberger (2013) examines the
National Longitudinal Study of Youth 1997, which surveys students
graduating high school in the early 2000s. Being suspended has long-term
impacts on educational attainment, likelihood of being arrested, and
incarceration. The length of a student's suspension is highly correlated
with students' future educational attainment, with those having
lengthier out of school suspensions (10 or more days) completing less
years of schooling. For boys suspended at any point in school, 40% of
Black students, 42% of Hispanic students, and 36% of white students drop
out and do not complete their high school diplomas. While some students
who ever face suspension do go on to higher education, only a very small
proportion complete college degrees. Across all backgrounds, those who
had ever been suspended were much more likely to have been arrested by
their late 20s and eventually incarcerated, than those who had never
been suspended from school.

A report from the Center for Community Alternatives begins to draw
connections between the school-to-prison pipeline and barriers to higher
education. The report outlines how school suspensions and other
disciplinary measures impact a student's ability to be accepted to
higher education institutions (2015). The report outlines that roughly
three-quarters of institutions ask for high school disciplinary records,
mainly via the use of the Common Application. In the report's survey
data, they show that 89% of these schools use disciplinary records in
their admissions decisions. This report motivates the idea of using the
introduction of the online Common Application and its increased use by
applicants as a quasi-experimental policy change in the disclosure of
high school disciplinary records in the college admissions process.

The Common Application
----------------------

In 2006, many colleges and universities adopted the online version of
the Common Application- a college application that could be used at
multiple participating institutions, instead of submitting
school-specific applications for each institution and therefore multiple
applications overall. The Common Application became available online in
2006, and featured an important question on whether or not a student had
ever been suspended from their high school- a question sometimes omitted
on the school-specific applications for many colleges and universities.
Since the adoption of the online format in 2006, member institutions to
the Common Application have grown substantially, meaning more and more
students use this service to apply for college and face having to
disclose their disciplinary records.

So who may be impacted by this change, and how many students now have to
disclose disciplinary records? In 2008, *Inside Higher Ed* reported
that, "At least some students are answering the questions in the
affirmative. In last year\'s admissions cycle, about 355,000 people
applied to college through the Common Application and 8,642 of them
answered 'Yes' to the question on whether they had been suspended,
expelled or put on probation because of school misconduct. In addition,
887 said that they had been convicted of either a misdemeanor, felony or
another crime." (2008) According to the Common Application's website,
roughly 1 million students are expected to use the Common Application in
2017 to apply to its over 700 member institutions. While the Common
Application dropped questions pertaining to students' criminal records
in 2016, the application still kept the question regarding student
disciplinary records (US News 2016).

By including this question, the report outlines how having to disclose a
suspension record could discourage students who have a disciplinary
record- especially students of color and first generation students- from
completing the application process. This indicates that high school
disciplinary records may negatively impact the likelihood of a student's
application or admission to a college or university even if he or she is
academically qualified. The report from the Center for Community
Alternatives outlines new concerns and evidence for suspension's impact
on college admissions, but few econometric studies have looked at the
impact of school discipline on college admissions and attendance. By
analyzing longitudinal data on the use of the Common Application,
disciplinary records, and college acceptance rates, we can better
understand the impact disclosing a school disciplinary record has on
college acceptance rates. While we know that increasing disciplinary
measures can be linked to incarceration and lower graduation rates,
there is less research on how school discipline impacts students'
trajectories into higher education beyond high school. How does school
suspension in high school, or even earlier, impact a student's
likelihood to not just graduate, but also move on to college,
university, or other forms of postsecondary schooling? Understanding the
linkages between discipline and college going can help to inform
important policy interventions, and illuminate the immensely negative
impact of disproportionate use of school discipline.

**Conceptual Framework** School discipline has documented negative
impacts on student achievement, their likelihood to drop out of school,
and the probability of future arrest and incarceration, but experiencing
discipline is likely to have further negative spillover effects on other
aspects of students' lives. College applications and admissions is one
additional area that may be impacted by the experience of school
discipline. Students with school disciplinary records may be impacted
through several channels: internally, through internalized oppression
and negative feedback, and externally by having a disciplinary record
that sends negative signals to teachers, counselors, and college
admissions officers. These impacts may occur in varying ways and to
different extents for individual students depending on personal factors,
school environments, home environments, and the level of discipline
experienced by the student (frequency, in-school suspension,
out-of-school suspension, expulsion, or referral to juvenile criminal
justice). Applying to college and college admissions depend on several
factors at the individual level: socioeconomic factors, academic
achievement, family and environmental factors, and so on. In my
research, I hypothesize that both applying to college and being admitted
to college also depends in part on whether or not a student has
experienced school discipline and holds a disciplinary record to be
disclosed on college applications. Both experiencing school discipline
and holding a disciplinary record may impact a student's decision to
apply to college at all. The experience of discipline through suspension
or expulsion may lead students to internalize the negative stereotype of
being a "bad kid". Internalized stereotypes may lead students to not
only engage in behaviors likely to be disciplined, but also to hold
lower expectations of themselves. In sociology, oppression is discussed
by being experienced from within and from without- in other words,
oppression can occur directly from others, or can be internalized by the
oppressed (Browne & England 1997). Akerlof and Kranton (2000) discuss
how internalized stereotypes or expectations of behavior may lead
students to engage in behaviors that seem otherwise irrational or not in
their best interest- for example, behaviors that result in discipline,
but may reward students socially within their peer group. Internalizing
negative stereotypes is a complex issue. Morris (2015) describes in
*Push Out: The Criminalization of Black Girls in Schools* that
internalized negative feedback is often way in which marginalized
students create empowering counter-narratives as a response to
oppression. These counter-narratives however may result in reduced
student achievement. Compounding issues of internalized negative
feedback are the ways in which teachers and guidance counselors may be
biased against students of color and students who have been disciplined
in the past. Student may be subject to negative bias when interacting
with guidance counselors, who are often the "gatekeepers" to the college
application process. We also know that guidance counselors are important
gatekeepers to how students are able to apply to college. Studies have
shown though that guidance counselors' advice may be susceptible to
racial bias (Linnehan, Weer, & Stonely 2011). One way to conceptualize
these impacts is to consider a *signaling model*. In economics,
signaling describes how individuals may covey information about their
abilities or productivity, particularly in the labor market. The
signaling model assumes that in the labor market, firms hire employees
under conditions of uncertainty, since employers are unable to actually
know a worker's productivity until they are already hired. Instead of
having perfect information about workers' productive capacities, workers
in the labor market signal their potential capabilities through their
characteristics as well as credentials (Spence 1973). The signaling
model can be applied to the college admissions process as well. Students
signal their capabilities to achieve academically to admissions officers
and institutions through their application materials: transcripts, test
scores, personal statements, and resumes. The presence of a high school
disciplinary record then may send a negative signal to college
admissions officers. Literature on the relationship between criminal
records and employment offers a conceptual framework for how these
records may create a negative signal. It is well documented that
criminal records negatively impact employment, especially as many job
applications ask for applicants to disclose their records or records are
searched using background checks. The impact of criminal records may be
analogous to that of school disciplinary records in the college
admissions process. In one study of the impact of criminal records on
employment, Pager (2003) explores the causal mechanisms of how criminal
records impact employment and identifies these records as a "negative
credential". Pager describes a negative credential as "unique mechanism
of stratification, in that it is the state that certifies particular
individuals in ways that qualify them for discrimination or social
exclusion." (2003) In this way then, if we conceptualize a school
disciplinary record as a negative credential, then the presence of the
record may qualify those students from exclusion from college admissions
(i.e. rejection), even given that they are otherwise qualified. To
understand how both internalized negative feedback and negative
credentials impact college applications and admissions, I conceptualize
a model of how students decide to apply to college and the expected
observed results given this decision process.

**Figure 1: College Application Decision Process & Expected Observed
Impacts **

Figure 1 above illustrates how internal and external negative feedback
and signaling, alongside the costs of college applications, may inform
student decisions to apply to colleges and universities, and the
expected observed impacts of these decisions in terms of college
applications and admissions rates.

In this model, students choose between not applying to any four-year
colleges, applying using institution specific applications (which are
less likely to ask students to disclose their disciplinary records), and
using the online Common Application (which does ask students to disclose
their disciplinary records). Students may not apply to any four-year
colleges if disclosing their disciplinary records deters them from the
process, if they have internalized the negative feedback of school
discipline, if they were not recommended for college by guidance
counselors and teachers, or for other personal and familial reasons. The
costs of not applying to a four-year college however may be high in the
long run, through lower labor market returns associated with not earning
a college degree. If students do decide to apply to college, they may
choose to do so by using the institutional specific application process,
which may not ask them to disclose their disciplinary records. The cost
of this application process may be higher in terms of filling out
multiple applications. Using the online Common Application has lower
costs, since students can apply to multiple institutions using the
application, but a higher risk of possibly being rejected in admissions
due to having to disclose their school disciplinary records.
Disciplinary records may increase the likelihood of rejection, by being
perceived as a "negative credential" by college admissions officers.

Given this student-level problem tree, I hypothesize that school
disciplinary records could have two potential impacts on college
applications and admissions:

1.  Internalized negative feedback via school discipline and holding a
    school disciplinary record may reduce the number of college
    applications from students most likely to experience discipline i.e.
    black and Hispanic students, first generation students, and
    low-income students.

2.  The introduction of the online Common Application and its increased
    adoption by institutions would compel more students to have to
    disclose their disciplinary records in the college application
    process. Disclosing disciplinary records would signal a "negative
    credential" to college admissions officers, resulting in decreased
    admissions rates for students most likely to have disciplinary
    records i.e. black and Hispanic students, first generation students,
    and low-income students.

These two observed impacts of school disciplinary records can be
researched using the available data on college applications and
admissions, using descriptive statistics, and examining the impact of
adopting the online Common Application

Data & Methodology 
-------------------

To explore the question of whether or not the disclosure of disciplinary
records on the Common Application impacted college admissions, I will
use the quasi-experimental method of *difference-in-differences*. The
difference-in-differences model is a quasi-experimental design that
exploits specific changes in conditions (i.e. policies, laws, etc.)
impacting one group (the treatment group) and comparing its impact to a
non-effected control group (the non-treatment group) to construct a
counterfactual argument (Angrist & Pischke 2009). The
difference-in-differences approach requires panel data of repeated
observations of the same subject over time. The regressor of interest is
a variable that varies at the group or aggregate level over time given a
treatment, such as a policy intervention. For this research design, I
identify that the introduction of the Common Application in 2006 may
present a policy intervention, which now mandates that students disclose
their disciplinary records on their college application. To analyze the
effect of this intervention, I will need data on student college
applications, the demographics of applicants, and admissions rate for
each year and institution. These data should also include whether or not
the institution accepted the Common Application and when, whether or not
the institutional application asked students to disclose disciplinary
records, and how many applicants used the Common Application if
applicable. If disclosing school discipline impacts college admissions
via the Common Application, I would expect to observe a discontinuity
after 2006 and onward as more institutions adopt the online Common
Application (and as more schools adopt the application) with lower rates
of admissions for students who have disclosed their disciplinary
records. Using institutional-level data, this would mean a markedly
lower acceptance rates for those demographic groups mostly likely to
experience school discipline and have a disciplinary record.

To investigate whether or not the more prevalent use of the Common
Application following the adoption of the 2006 online format has changed
how school disciplinary records impact college admissions, I will
examine admissions patterns using institutional-level data. Since I am
interested in how admissions may have changed after the adoption of the
online Common Application became more ubiquitous, therefore making
disclosure of school disciplinary records more prevalent, I will examine
institutional-level data over several years both before 2006 and after
up through the most recent data available. These data will include
institutional-level characteristics, number of applicants, how
applicants applied to the school (Common Application or
institution-specific application), demographic and socioeconomic traits
of the applicant pool, if and when the institution began accepting the
Common This research will focus on four-year postsecondary institutions
with an application process (not open enrollment, as is more common with
two-year or community colleges). Given the size and controversies of the
for-profit sector, I will focus on non-profit public and private
four-year colleges and universities.[^2] Knowing that black and Hispanic
students are often most impacted by school discipline, it is expected
that these demographic groups would experience the most significant
decline in acceptance rates due to disclosing school disciplinary
records.

### Available Data & Data Collection

The Delta Cost Project database compiles longitudinal data on
postsecondary institutions, admissions, and characteristics of their
incoming cohorts. These data are publically available for years
1987-2013, and include most postsecondary institutions in the United
States. Additional data on college admissions, demographics of
applicants, and use of the Common Application can be constructed through
secondary data sources as well as data collection. The US News & World
Report collects detailed information on college application pools and
admissions rates, as does the College Board and the National Center for
Educational Statistics College Tracker. Additional data on whether not
or not colleges and universities use the Common Application, when they
adopted the application, and whether or not their institutional
applications included disciplinary record disclosure will constitute an
original dataset created for this analysis and obtained through both
online sources, and querying each institution if necessary.

### Comparison Groups

By comparing admissions rates of institutions, I will be able to
construct comparison groups based on which institutions adopted the
Common Application and when, and which institutions may have previously
asked information on student high school disciplinary records. There
will be four comparison groups with which to compare admissions rates.
These groups are constructed as follows:

1.) Whether or not the institution adopted or began accepting the Common
Application with the time of adoption defined as t=0 and

2.) Whether or not the institutional specific application (accepted
before and after the adoption of the Common Application) already asked
students to disclosure their high school disciplinary records.

I will also include and indicator variable for the time period post 2006
to account for the fact that after its 2006 online version was
available, more institutions began adopting the Common Application from
year to year from 2006 onward.

These categories create four comparison groups: schools that adopted the
Common Application but never asked about disciplinary records, those
that did not adopt the Common Application and never asked students to
disclose disciplinary records, schools that never adopted the Common
Application but did already ask for disciplinary records, and those that
never adopted the Common Application but did already ask for student
disciplinary records. Table 1 outlines the different comparison groups
and the expected impact of disciplinary record exposure via the Common
Application.

+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| **Table 1: Comparison | *Adopted Common       | *Did Not Adopt Common |
| Groups Expected       | Application at t=0*   | Application at t=0*   |
| Impacts of Common     |                       |                       |
| Application Adoption  |                       |                       |
| on Admissions Rates   |                       |                       |
| for Four-Year         |                       |                       |
| Colleges &            |                       |                       |
| Universities **       |                       |                       |
+=======================+=======================+=======================+
| *Institutional        | Expected admissions   | No Expected Change    |
| Application Does/Did  | rate for groups       | (other than time      |
| Not Ask Disciplinary  | likely to have        | trend)                |
| Disclosure*           | disciplinary records  |                       |
|                       | to decline after t=0  |                       |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | \[Treatment Group\]   |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| *Institutional        | No Expected Change    | No Expected Change    |
| Applications Does/Did | (other than time      | (other than time      |
| Ask Disciplinary      | trend)                | trend)                |
| Record Disclosure *   |                       |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+

By examining applications and admissions rates by demographic groups
(minority applicants, first generation applicants, and low-income
applicants) for each comparison group, it would be expected that for
institutions adopting the Common Application but did not previously ask
about student disciplinary records, the admissions rate- especially for
students of color- would decline after t=0, holding all else equal and
controlling for time trends in admissions.

### Difference-in-Differences 

The difference-in-difference approach uses panel data with repeated
observations of the same subjects- in this case colleges and
universities- to show whether or not a policy change impacted college
admissions rates. I will use this method in order to estimate the impact
disclosing disciplinary records via the adoption of the Common
Application on admissions rates for key demographic and socioeconomic
groups. For my research design, I am interest in showing how the
admissions rate at institutions changed given the introduction of the
online Common Application's disciplinary record disclosure for students.

In my difference-in-differences model, *Y~o~* is the admissions rate,
*i* is each individual institution (colleges and universities), and *t*
is time where *t=*0 marks the introduction of the online Common
Application.$\ $In this model, $\gamma_{i}$ represents the time
invariant institutional-level effects on admissions and$\ \lambda_{t}$
represents time effects. The estimate of $\text{δ\ }$is a constant
showing the causal effect of interest- the change in the admissions
rate. Let *CA* be an indicator variable for adopting the Common
Application, *d~t~* be a time indicator, and *D* be a indicator for
whether or not the institution already disclosed discipline on their
applications. Then the regression difference-in-differences equation is:

$$Y_{\text{it}} = \ \alpha + \text{βD}_{i} + \text{γCA}_{i} + \text{λd}_{t} + \text{δCA}_{i}d_{t} + \varepsilon_{\text{it}}$$

I will use this model to estimate $\delta$, the effect of adopting the
online Common Application at time *t*=0 on the admissions rate *Y~it~*.
This will estimate the effect that adopting the online Common
Application and its disciplinary record disclosure had on admissions
rates, controlling for institutional and time trends, and in comparison
to those institutions that did not adopt the online Common Application
or had exclusively institution-specific applications both disclosing and
not disclosing disciplinary records. Estimating this model for
applicants by demographic group will provide more robust results as to
whether or not the Common Application adoption impacted admissions rates
at four-year colleges and institutions after its adoption.

 Limitations 
-------------

While the difference-in-difference approach allows me to examine panel
data at the institutional-level on college admissions rates, the
approach does have concerns to be mindful of in interpreting my
estimates and informing my inference. Other studies using this
methodology explain concerns for issues such as heterogeneity and small
treatment groups. Dube, Lester, and Reich (2010) work on estimating the
impact of minimum wage increases on employment points out that the
assumption of parallel paths in the difference-in-differences approach
can fail to account for spatial and other forms of heterogeneity. The
parallel paths assumption asserts that the average change in the
non-treated group (control or comparison group) represents the
*counterfactual change* in the treated group, had no treatment been
applied. In other words, it assumes that if the treatment hadn't
happened, the groups would be more or less identical over time. If there
is unobserved heterogeneity in college admission rates over time, this
could be problematic for my estimates. Small treatment groups are also
an issue for using difference-in-differences, as noted by Conley and
Taber (2011) in their review of the method. Since a growing number of
institutions have adopted the online Common Application since 2006, this
should be of limited concern.

Other limitations to consider may include that given the use of
institutional-level data, it may be difficult o infer the impact of
disciplinary disclosure on admissions rates given the relatively smaller
number of college applicants who are impacted by this change. However,
focusing on key demographic groups- mainly black and Hispanic applicants
and those from disadvantaged socioeconomic backgrounds- can help to
narrow the analysis. This research may also face issues of selection
bias, as well as the need to control for time trends in admissions rates
and the composition of applicants.

### Selection Issues

An obvious concern to research on how school discipline impacts
college-going is the notion that school discipline selects for "bad
kids" who would be unlikely to attend or apply to college in the first
place. It is shown that the achievement gap is distinctly linked to
school discipline, with students experiencing school discipline often
having negative impacts on their academic performance (Gregory, Skiba, &
Noguera 2010). But, this argument must be unpacked to understand what
influences a student's likelihood to experience discipline, and how
school discipline may not be the best proxy of non-college-going
behaviors. Skiba and Williams (2014) show that there is no clear
evidence that there are racial differences in misbehavior by students.
They show that even after controlling a wide array of misbehaviors
warranting school discipline, race remains the main influencing factor
as to whether or not students are disciplined and the severity of that
discipline. They write, In short, "...the data are consistent: there is
simply no good evidence that racial differences in discipline are due to
differences in rates or types of misbehavior by students of different
races." (Skiba & Williams 2014) It is however a concern that due to the
lower likelihood of students who experience discipline to apply to
college, the impact on admissions rates may be difficult to detect
econometrically.

### Sample Size 

Since this study is looking specifically at student who have both
experienced school discipline and also applied to college, I expect to
be limited by being able to examine a very small number of observations
of students in these categories. School discipline is widespread, but
only a small proportion of students ever experience this in K-12
schooling. Of the population of students experiencing school discipline,
an even smaller proportion applies to college. In 2008, it is reported
that of the 355,000 students using the Common Applications, that 8,642
of them had a school disciplinary record (Inside Higher Ed). Use of the
Common Application though has grown since its introduction, so each year
should offer more observations of students who had applied to college
with a disciplinary record. This may imply that the impact of the Common
Application may be difficult to estimate, but increasingly prevalent
over time as more institutions adopted the application. Using a
national-level sample will help to guard against issues of sample size
in this research.

Contribution
------------

Since the Center for Community Alternatives released their report on
school discipline and college admissions, there has been much discussion
on the topic of how disclosing school disciplinary records may negative
impact college admissions. However, there have been very few econometric
studies examining the impact discipline disclosure on college
applications and admissions. This study would contribute by providing an
analysis of whether or not disclosure of disciplinary records impacts
the composition of applicants to colleges and universities, and
admission rates for students using the online Common Application after
its introduction in 2006.This research will also contribute an
understanding of how school discipline may have long-term consequences
students beyond just their experiences in K-12, in impacting their
opportunities for educational advancement and therefore long-term labor
market opportunities as well.

**\
**

IV: The Impact of "Carceral Schools" on College Expectations: Evidence from the National Crime Victimization Survey School Crime Supplement 
============================================================================================================================================

Introduction and Background
---------------------------

The school-to-prison pipeline trend is a phenomenon in which school
disciplinary practices and increased student interaction with the
juvenile criminal justice system often leads students into
incarceration, rather than to college or the labor market. The
school-to-prison pipeline is characterized by trends towards increased
disciplinary measures, the rise of zero-tolerance policies, and
increased reliance on police to deal with behavioral and disciplinary
issues in public schools (Heitzeg 2009). While school discipline has
been a key driver of the school-to-prison pipeline, other changes in
schools have contributed to creating prison-like environments in
schools. Many of these school-level environmental changes are associated
with the school-to-prison pipeline, such as the increasing prevalence of
police in schools, the use of monitoring and surveillance of students,
and the outsourcing of school discipline to the juvenile criminal
justice system (Kupchik & Bracey 2010). These school environments often
negatively impact students by increasing the likelihood of being
disciplined, and also creating hostile social climates by increasing
fear and bullying amongst students (Kupchik & Bracey 2010; Lacoe 2013;
Kupchik & Farina 2016). Given those impacts of changing school security
and safety measures these changes alongside the increasing use and
severity of discipline, are likely have additional long-term impacts on
student achievement and their lifetime trajectories.

This essay will examine the impact that attending a *carceral school-* a
school with notable police presence, and use of surveillance and
monitoring- has on student expectations of attending college in the
future. This research will address how the changes in school
environments associated with the school-to-prison pipeline negatively
impact student expectations of going to college, illuminating an
important negative spillover effect of these policies. While many of
these policies are intended to increase school safety, they may in fact
negatively impact students' long-term educational achievement. These
schools then may be important factors in driving inequality, rather than
providing equalizing educational opportunities.

### School Discipline & Its Impacts

The schoolhouse-to-jailhouse trend -- another metaphorical name for the
school to prison pipeline -- has in part been due to the rise of zero
tolerance policies in schools, mostly brought on by the introduction of
the Gun Free Schools Act in 1994 (Skiba & Knesting 2001). These policies
appear to have been further intensified as a result of the introduction
of high stakes testing and other reforms after the No Child Left Behind
Act of 2001 (Figlio 2005). Increased use and severity of school
discipline and reliance of schools on the juvenile criminal justice
system mirrors many of the changes in the broader criminal justice
landscape in the United States: harsher sentences, rising income
inequality, and limited availability of social services for mental
illness and other disabilities (Raphael & Stoll 2009).

The school-to-prison pipeline in American schools has in part been
caused by the rise of zero tolerance policies -- a term first coined in
the 1980s to refer to strict disciplinary procedures tied to student
behavior and violations of school conduct codes. The policies gained
momentum in the 1990s after the passing of the Gun Free Schools Act of
1994 (Skiba & Knesting 2001). These policies influence increasingly
strict discipline for students in violation, and often outsource school
discipline to the juvenile criminal justice system. The increased
prevalence of strict discipline like out of school suspensions actually
increases the likelihood of students reoffending or engaging in criminal
activity outside of school (Cuellar & Markowitz 2015). These
disciplinary codes are not limited just to violent misconduct, but often
extend to nonviolent violations, such as dress codes or talking in
class. Students experiencing these forms of discipline are more likely
to be disciplined again, drop out of school, or be incarcerated in the
future (Shollenberger 2013). School discipline is one of the main
drivers of the school-to-prison pipeline, referring students to the
criminal justice system instead of other, possibly more appropriate,
social services. Further, there is little evidence that school
discipline is an effective deterrent for misbehavior, and instead school
discipline disrupts students' academic achievement and makes them more
likely to engage in further misbehavior or criminal activities, creating
a vicious circle of structural inequality (Cuellar & Markowitz 2015;
Mendez 2003).

A report from the Department of Education publicized deep disparities in
the use of discipline for black and minority students, as well as those
with disabilities. Black students are three times more likely than white
students to be suspended. As early as preschool, black students comprise
nearly half of all school suspensions despite being only 18% of
enrollment (Department of Education 2016). Boys are more likely to be
suspended, but black girls have the highest suspension rate of girls of
all races. The increasing discipline of black girls mirrors recent
trends in increasing rates of incarceration for women of color (Swavola,
Riley, & Subramanian 2016). Even more concerning, the report shows that
students with disabilities, especially students of color, are
disproportionately more likely to be subject to school discipline
(Department of Education 2016). The trend of increasing discipline and
increasingly outsourcing school discipline to the juvenile criminal
justice system is attributed both to the broader trend of mass
incarceration as well as school reforms.

One study shows the increased severity and frequency of punishments in
schools to be highly correlated with the introduction of higher stakes
testing policies, like the No Child Left Behind Act. The authors show
that on average lower performing schools tended to assign harsher
punishment, and the frequency of punishments increased during testing
periods (Figlio 2005). These illustrate the striking ways in which
school disciplinary tactics and institutionalized racism, as well as
ableism, intersect to create the school-to-prison pipeline, leading to
greater rates of incarceration and lower rates of graduation. The
negative impacts of school discipline have been widely documented.
Students experiencing discipline are more likely to drop out and not
finish high school, and more likely to be incarcerated. Shollenberger
(2013) shows that suspension has long-term impacts on educational
attainment, likelihood of being arrested, and incarceration. While some
students who ever face suspension do go on to higher education, only a
very small proportion complete college degrees.

But the impacts of the school-to-prison pipeline may extend far beyond
just that of school discipline. The school-to-prison pipeline has
coincided with stark environmental changes in schools, such as the
increased presence of police and the use of surveillance and monitoring.
To what extent does the environment of a highly policed and monitored
school have an impact on student expectations of college going?

### What Makes a Carceral School?

To understand the environmental changes associated with the
school-to-prison pipeline, I identify a notion of *carceral schools*. In
*Homeroom Security*, Kupchik and Bracey (2015) examine what they call
the new regime of school discipline. They make the point that police
presence in schools is by no means a new phenomenon; school resource
officer programs (SROs) came about as early as the 1950s, though they
did not become common until the 1990s. This new regime of school
discipline is marked by increasingly prevalent use of zero-tolerance
policies, police presence in schools, as well as the use of
technological surveillance such as metal detectors and surveillance
cameras, which sociologist Loïc Wacquant notes as embodying the physical
characteristics of a prison (2001). Carla Shedd (2015) describes in
great detail in her study of Chicago Public Schools the severity and
ubiquity of police and surveillance both in schools, but also in school
neighborhoods -- increasing the likelihood that students interact with
police and therefore are more likely to face disciplinary action or
arrest. Shedd (2015) describes schools with police officers, security
guards, metal detectors, and other forms of monitoring and surveillance
as part of the universal carceral apparatus, and argues that this use of
resources is economically inefficient. Carceral schools promote more
social control and socialize students into prison conditions more so
than focusing on education.

. In this research, I will use this definition of carceral schools to
compose an index measure of these schools that accounts for the presence
of police and use of surveillance and monitoring. I will then use an
econometric model to estimate the impact that carceral schools have on
student expectations of attending college.

**Conceptual Framework** To conceptualize how the carceral school
environment impacts student expectations of college going, I identify
three pathways. The first pathway is through selection in that carceral
schools are more likely to occur in poorer and more predominately black
and Hispanic areas. Structural inequality and discrimination creates
conditions where students from poor and minority backgrounds already are
less likely to have expectations of college going. Second, the
environment of a carceral school can deter expectations of college going
through internalized negative feedback for students. Third, carceral
schools may deter college expectations by over-allocating resources
towards crime prevention and safety that crowds out school spending on
college preparation and other academic resources. Selection for poorer
schools as well as resource crowding out are both structural pathways
that impact college aspirations, while internalized negative feedback
occurs at the student-level within student interactions with teachers,
security personnel, administrators, and the criminal justice system.
There is a notable relationship between the presence of increased
security measures in schools with race and class. Kupchik and Ward
(2011) find that the racial and socioeconomic composition of schools is
a strong indicator as to whether or not schools adopt security measures
such as police presence, drug-sniffing dogs, surveillance cameras, and
metal detectors. While increasing school security is common across most
districts in the Unite States, schools in areas of concentrate poverty
are much more likely to adopt these measures. The study also finds that
metal detectors are much more common in schools with more minority
students (Kupchik & Ward 2011). These findings indicate that carceral
schools are more likely to be schools with a higher proportion of poor
students and students from black and Hispanic backgrounds. These
socioeconomic, racial, and ethnic factors already are highly correlated
with lower educational attainment (Ryan & Bauman 2016). This is a
structural reason why students in carceral schools may have lowered
expectations of going to college. **T**he environment of a carceral
school- where there is a strong police presence, use of surveillance
cameras, and metal detectors- may send negative messages to students.
Research shows that the presence of metal detectors actually heightens
students' sense of fear, and negatively impacts students' sense of
safety, especially at urban schools (Gastic 2011). This environment may
also contribute to internalized oppression experienced by students in
their school environments, especially students of color. In sociological
theory, oppression is describes as being both experienced directly-
through the actions of others- as well as internally, such as when an
individual begins to believe the negative messages perpetuated directly
by others or through stereotypes (Brown & England 1997). An environment
of surveillance and police presence may be internalized by students
associating schooling with punishment, instead of intellectual
enrichment and economic empowerment. The economics of identity explores
this idea by theorizing that negative stereotypes and expectations can
be internalized is seemingly economically irrational ways. Akerlof and
Kranton (200) show that internalizing a negative stereotype or message,
even if it is not in an individual's best interest, occurs since
individuals may experience social rewards from their peer group.
Similarly, Morris (2015) describes that when students internalize
negative stereotypes, they may use this to construct what she calls a
counter-narrative. That is, taking on the identity of the negative
stereotype in an empowering way as a response to oppression as a means
of reclaiming that stereotype. In her book *Push Out: The
Criminalization of Black Girls in School*, Morris (2015) describes how
students take on the persona of being a "bad kid" as a form of
resistance to the racial oppression they face in schools. Students in a
carceral school then may take on defiant attitudes towards schooling, as
an act of resistance. To conceptualize how carceral schools impact
students, I propose that the heightened presence of police and
surveillance in schools may contribute to the internalization of
negative feedback and stereotypes by implying students are suspect
enough to be monitored and surveilled. A heightened sense of fear in the
classroom may compound these internalize negative feedbacks by also
negatively impacting achievement (Lacoe 2013). Through these dynamics
internalized negative feedback of being criminalized and monitored may
significantly deter student expectations of postsecondary schooling. As
a final channel through which students may be deterred from college
aspirations, I propose that a focus on school safety through creating a
carceral apparatus may crowd out the school resources dedicated to
preparing students for postsecondary education. A limited amount of
research has been dedicated to understanding how schools allocate their
resources for school safety despite the growth in the use of
surveillance, monitoring and police in schools. DeAngelis et al. (2011)
is one study that reviews school budgets to show that poor, urban
schools spend disproportionately more on school security measures than
other districts. I hypothesize that this disproportionate spending may
crowd out spending on other important resources for college preparation,
such as guidance counselors, college preparatory courses, and other
college prep programs. Relatively less access to college preparatory
resources then may also deter the expectation of going to college.
Figure 2 illustrates how the channels of selection, internalized
feedback, and school-level resource crowding out may impact student
expectations of college going:

**Figure 2: Channels of Impacting Student Expectation of College-Going**

In this diagram, I show that student expectation of college going may be
impacted by the compounded effects of selection (poorer, urban schools),
internalized negative feedback, as well as school-level resource
crowding out.

Data & Methodology
------------------

Econometrically linking how carceral schools impact student expectations
of college going requires recent school and student-level data on the
school's climate. These data should exist for multiple schools and
years, in order to robustly estimate how changes in the level of
policing, monitoring, and surveillance in schools influences student's
expectations that they will attend college.

### National Crime Victimization Survey: School Crime Supplement 

The National Crime Victimization Survey: School Crime Supplement.

The School Crime Supplement (SCS) is collected by the National Center
for Education Statistics, with one survey in 1995 and then every two
years from 1999 through 2015. The SCS survey is completed by students
and asks questions about the school climate, student perceptions of
safety, as well as student expectations of going to college, though
college expectations were only asked on the survey from 2001 onward. The
survey also includes variables on school characteristics and parents'
employment and education. . For each year, the student questionnaires
are given to students 12-19 years old currently enrolled in a secondary
school or any school advancing the student towards a high school
diploma, including both public and private elementary through high
schools, home school, vocational schools, and other qualifying
institutions.

For my research, the important variables of interest are those having to
due with school safety and student expectations of going to college, so
I will use the survey years available from 2001-2015. Specific
availability of these variables and variable names are listed in **Table
A** of the Appendix. Variables related to carceral schools will be used
to create a carceral school index, which is my regressor or independent
variable of interest. I will use student's self-reported grades as a
control for student achievement alongside control for household income
and educational attainment. My outcome variable will be the student
response for whether or not they expect to go to college.

To construct an index of a carceral school, I am interested in the
responses to the following survey questions about the student's school
environment:

-   Have assigned security guards or police officers?

-   Use metal detectors, including wands?

-   Have locked entrance and exit doors during the day?

-   Perform locker checks?

-   Use security cameras to monitor schools?

Students also respond to survey questions about their future
expectations of going to and graduating from a college or university.
These questions include:

-   Thinking about the future, do you think you will attend school after
    high school, such as a college or technical school?

-   Thinking about the future, do you think you will graduate from a
    4-year college?

Here, there are two different questions related to college expectations:
do you expect to go to college and do you expected to graduate. I will
analyze two models in which the first examines expectations of going to
college, and the second examines expectations of graduating from
college. I predict that the impact of going to a carceral school will be
even stronger for expectations of graduating college For my research,
the SCS gives me cross-sectional data for each year and school regarding
student expectations of college-going, whether or not they attend a
carceral school, and allow me to implement school-level fixed effects.

### Methodology 

For researching the impact these schools have on college-going for
students who experience the universal carceral apparatus, the available
data can be used to create an index of *carceral schools* This measure
will index factors such as the presence of police in schools, the use of
metal detectors, and the use other forms of electronic surveillance. It
can also account for measures of how students perceive their school's
safety and the presence of police officers.

I will use a *fixed effects regression model* to estimate the impact
that attending a carceral school has on student expectations of going to
college for each survey year. The National Crime Victimization Survey:
School Crime Supplement offers repeated cross-sectional data for schools
across the country. With that, I can use a fixed effect regression model
to control for school-level heterogeneity (Angrist & Pischke 2008). A
fixed effects regression model assumes that there are time invariant
omitted and confounding variables. In this case, these would be
school-level omitted variables that impact the outcome variable. I will
then use the following school fixed effects regression model to estimate
the impact of carceral schools on student expectations of going to
college. Here, y~is~ is the outcome variable of interest representing
student expectations of going to college where t=survey year and
s=school:

$$Y_{\text{st}} = \ \alpha_{s} + \ \beta X_{\text{st}} + \ \gamma C_{\text{st}} + \ \epsilon_{\text{st}}$$

Here the outcome variable of interest is student expectations of going
to college. The model shows that college expectations are a function of
*X~st~,* the student's parental or household income, parental or
household educational attainment, and self-reported grades, and *C~st~*
the index variable indicating whether or not they attended a carceral
school, and $\alpha$, the unobserved school-level effects. The regressor
of interest in this model is *C~st~,* an index variable that indicates
whether or not a student attended a carceral school, making $\gamma$ an
estimate of the causal effect of interest. The regression control for
school-level fixed effects, as well as parental income and educational
attainment. Using this regression model, I will estimate how carceral
schools impact college expectations.

Limitations
-----------

One issue with estimating the impact that carceral schools have on
students' college-going attitudes and behaviors is that schools in the
United States are often highly segregated by both race and income
levels, both of which are also high correlated with college-going
(Kupchik & Ward 2011). For this reason, using school-level fixed
effects, as well as controlling for parental income and educational
attainment, are crucial for obtaining reliable estimates. Time trends
are also an important confound to consider, as over the years of
1999-2015 college enrollment for minority students has increased,
indicating an overall trend in increasing expectations of going to
college for students likely to attend a carceral school (Aud, Fox, &
KewalRamani 2010; Kupchik & Ward 2011). However, given this trend, if I
am able to estimate a negative impact of carceral schools on college
expectations, this estimate would be even more robust given the trend.

Contribution 
-------------

This study will examine the impact that attending a carceral school with
a heavy police presence, use of surveillance cameras, use of metal
detectors, and so on has on student expectations of going to college.
This will provide an important insight into how this school safety
measures actually have negative impacts on students' long-term
educational expectations, which poses large individual costs in terms of
the forgone labor market rewards for attending college. This study will
illuminate an important negative spillover effect of the over-policing
and increased surveillance found in many poor and urban schools in the
United States.

 V: Contribution & Conclusion 
==============================

The essays of this dissertation will situate analysis of the
school-to-prison pipeline and school discipline within a political
economy context, to better understand the interaction of these trends
with changes in American capitalism. By extending the analysis to
understanding the impacts of school discipline and carceral schools on
higher education, we can better understand the long-term consequences of
these trends and how they influence racial inequality in the United
States. Further, understanding how experiencing school discipline
impacts college going begins a conversation with concrete policy
solutions regarding the use of school discipline generally, and
disclosure of disciplinary records in the college application process
more specifically. This dissertation will offer insights into how
education in a capitalist society poses a contradiction in which
schooling -an institution assumed to be equalizing- reinforces and
perpetuates social and economic inequality.

VI: References 
===============

Akerlof, George A. and Rachel E. Kranton. 2000. \"Economics and
Identity.\" *Quarterly Journal of Economics* 115 (3): 715-753.

Alexander, Michelle. 2010.* The New Jim Crow: Mass Incarceration in the
Age of Colorblindness*. USA: The New Pres.

Angrist, Joshua D. and Jörn-Steffen Pischke. 2008. \"Mostly Harmless
Econometrics: An Empiricist\'s Companion.\" *An Empiricist\'s
Companion* (March): 392.

Aud, Susan, M. Fox, and A. KewalRamani. 2010*. Status and Trends in the
Education of Racial and Ethnic Groups*. National Center for Education
Statistics.

Becker, Gary. 1962.* Investment in Human Capital: A Theoretical
Analysis*. Vol. 70.

Bowles, Samuel and Herbert Gintis. 1976.* Schooling in Capitalist
America: Educational Reform and the Contradictions of Economic Life*.

Browne, Irene and Paula England. 1997. \"Oppression from within and
without in Sociological Theories: An Application to Gender.\" *Current
Perspectives in Sociological Theory* 17: 77-104.

Budde, Ray. 1988*. Education by Charter: Restructuring School Districts
Key to Long Term Improvement in American Education*.

Center for Community Alternatives. 2015*. Education Suspended*.
<http://www.communityalternatives.org/pdf/publications/EducationSuspended.pdf>

CNN News. 1996. \"Now that Johnny can Read, can He Get a Job at
IBM?\" *CNN News*, March. http://www.cnn.com/US/9603/education\_summit/.

College Board. \"Annual Survey of
Colleges.\" http://professionals.collegeboard.org/higher-ed-recruitment/annual-survey.,
accessed May 12, 2015.

Conley, Timothy G. and Christopher R. Taber. 2011. \"Inference with
"Difference in Differences" with a Small Number of Policy
Changes.\" *Review of Economics and Statistics* 93 (1): 113-125.

Cuellar, Alison Evans and Sara Markowitz. 2015. \"School Suspension and
the School-to-Prison Pipeline.\" *International Review of Law and
Economics* 43: 98-106.

Davis, Angela Yvonne. 2003.* Are Prisons Obsolete?* New York: Seven
Stories Press.

DeAngelis, Karen J., Brian O. Brent, and Danielle Ianni. 2011. \"The
Hidden Cost of School Security.\" *Journal of Education Finance* 36 (3):
312-337.

Delta Cost Project. \"Delta Cost Project
Database.\" http://www.deltacostproject.com/delta-cost-project-database.,
accessed April 28, 2017.

Department of Education. 2014*. Data Snapshot: School Discipline*.

Dube, Arindrajit, T. William Lester, and Michael Reich. 2010. \"Minimum
Wage Effects Across State Borders: Estimates using Contiguous
Counties.\" *Review of Economics and Statistics* 92 (4): 945-964.

Figlio, David N. 2006. \"Testing, Crime and Punishment.\" *Journal of
Public Economics* 90 (4-5): 837-851.

Fox, Jeremy C. May 21, 2017. "After Backlash, Malden School Suspends
Controversial Hair Policy." The Boston Globe.
<https://www.bostonglobe.com/metro/2017/05/21/trustees-malden-school-meet-over-hair-policy/P0gA6z5wAT65hq84DbagmO/story.html>

Friedman, Milton. 1955. \"The Role of Government in Education.\"
In *Economics and the Public Interest*, 123-44.

Garcia, Jose and Noah De Lissovoy. 2013. "Doing School Time: The Hidden
Curriculum Goes to Prison." Journal for Critical Education Policy
Studies 11(4):49-69.

Gastic, Billie. 2011. \"Metal Detectors and Feeling Safe at
School.\" *Education and Urban Society* 43 (4): 486-498.

Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F. Katz. 2010.* The Race between Technology
& Education*. USA: Harvard University Press.

Gregory, Anne, Russell J. Skiba, and Pedro A. Noguera. 2010. \"The
Achievement Gap and the Discipline Gap: Two Sides of the Same
Coin?\" *Educational Researcher* 39 (1): 59-68.

Heckman, James, John Eric Humphries, and Gregory Veramendi. 2016.
"Returns to Education: The Causal Effect of Education on Earnings,
Health, and Smoking." Human Capital and Economic Opportunity Global
Working Group Paper.

Heitzeg, Nancy. 2009. \"Education Or Incarceration: Zero Tolerance
Policies and the School to Prison Pipeline.\" *Forum on Public Policy
Online*: 1-21.

Hoffman, S. 2014. \"Zero Benefit: Estimating the Effect of Zero
Tolerance Discipline Polices on Racial Disparities in School
Discipline.\" *Educational Policy* 28 (1): 69-95.

Hoxby, Caroline. 2003a. \"School Choice and School Productivity: Could
School Choice be a Tide that Lifts all Boats?\" In *The Economics of
School Choice*. USA: University of Chicago Press.

Hoxby, Caroline M. 2000. \"Does Competition among Public Schools Benefit
Students and Taxpayers?\" *American Economic Review* 90 (5): 1209-1238.

Hoxby, Caroline Minter. 2003b. \"School Choice and School Competition:
Evidence from the United States.\" *Swedish Economic Policy Review* 10:
9-65.

Inside Higher Ed. 2009. \"Covering Up Or Scaring Off?\" *Inside Higher
Ed*, September. http://www.insidehighered.com/news/2008/09/29/disclose.

Kinsler, Josh. 2013. \"School Discipline: A Source Or Salve for the
Racial Achievement Gap?\" *International Economic Review* 54 (1):
355-383.

Kotz, David. 2015. \"What is Neoliberalism?\" In *The Rise and Fall of
Neoliberal Capitalism*. USA: Harvard University Press.

Kotz, David and Terrence McDonough. 2010. \"Global Neoliberalism and the
Contemporary Social Structure of Accumulation.\" In *Contemporary
Capitalism and its Crises: Social Structures of Accumulation Theory for
the Twenty-First Century*, edited by Terrence McDonough, Michael Reich
and David Kotz. UK: Cambridge University Press.

Kupchik, A. and K. A. Farina. 2016. \"Imitating Authority: Students
Perceptions of School Punishment and Security, and Bullying
Victimization.\" *Youth Violence and Juvenile Justice* 14 (2): 147-163.

Kupchik, Aaron and Nicole Bracey. 2010. \"A New Regime.\" In *Homeroom
Security: School Discipline in an Age of Fear*. New York: New York
University Press.

Kupchik, Aaron and Torin Monahan. 2006. \"The New American School:
Preparation for Post‐industrial Discipline.\" *British Journal of
Sociology of Education* 27 (5): 617-631.

Linnehan, Frank, Christy H. Weer, and Paul Stonely. 2011. \"High School
Guidance Counselor Recommendations: The Role of Student Race,
Socioeconomic Status, and Academic Performance.\" *Journal of Applied
Social Psychology* 41 (3): 536-558.

Losen, Daniel J, Michael A. Keith II, Cheri L. Hodson, and Tia E.
Martinez. 2016. "Charter Schools, Civil Rights, and School Discipline: A
Comprehensive Review." The Civil Rights Project.

McMillan Cottom, Tressie. 2017.* Lower Ed: The Troubling Rise of
for-Profit Colleges in the New Economy*. USA: The New Press.

Moretti, Enrico. 2004. "Estimating the Social Return to Higher
Education: Evidence from Longitudinal and Repeated Cross-Section Data."
*Journal of Econometrics* 121(1): 175-212.

Morris, Monique. 2015.* Push Out: The Criminalization of Black Girls in
Schools.* New York: The New Press.

National Crime Victimization Survey: School Crime Supplement,
1995-2015 (ICPSR) Codebooks. United States Department of Justice. Office
of Justice Programs. Bureau of Justice Statistics.

Pager, Devah. 2003. \"The Mark of a Criminal Record.\" *American Journal
of Sociology* 108 (5): 937-975.

Raffaele Mendez, Linda M. 2003. \"Predictors of Suspension and Negative
School Outcomes: A Longitudinal Investigation.\" *New Directions for
Youth Development* (99): 17-34.

Raphael, Steven and Michael A. Stoll. 2013.* Why are so Many Americans
in Prison?*. USA: Russell Sage Foundation.

Rothstein, Richard. 2013*. Unfinished March: For Public Schools,
Segregation then, and Segregation Since*. Economic Policy Institute.

Ryan, Camille L. and Kurt Bauman. 2016*. Educational Attainment in the
United States: 2015*. US Census Bureau.

Shedd, Carla. 2015.* Unequal City: Race, Schools, and Perceptions of
Injustice*. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Shollenberger, Tracy L. 2013. \"Racial Disparities in School Suspension
and Subsequent Outcomes: Evidence from the National Longitudinal Survey
of Youth 1997.\" In *Closing the School Discipline Gap: Equitable
Remedies for Excessive Exclusion.*, edited by Daniel J. Losen, 1-22. New
York: Teachers College Press.

Skiba Russell, Cecil R. Reynolds, Sandra Graham, Peter Sheras, Jane
Close Conoley, and Enedina Garcia-Vazquez. 2008. \"Are Zero Tolerance
Policies Effective in the Schools?: An Evidentiary Review and
Recommendations.\" *The American Psychologist* 63 (9): 852-862.
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19086747.

Skiba, Russell J., Mariella I. Arredondo, Chrystal Gray, and M. Karega
Rausch. 2016. \"What Do We Know about Discipline Disparities? New and
Emerging Research.\" In *Inequality in School Discipline*, 21-38. New
York: Palgrave Macmillan US.

Skiba, Russell J., Mariella I. Arredondo, and Natasha T. Williams. 2014.
\"More than a Metaphor: The Contribution of Exclusionary Discipline to a
School-to-Prison Pipeline.\" *Equity & Excellence in Education* 47 (4):
546-564.

Skiba, Russell J. and Kimberly Knesting. 2001. \"Zero Tolerance, Zero
Evidence: An Analysis of School Disciplinary Practice.\" *New Directions
for Youth Development* 2001 (92): 17-43.

Skiba, Russell J. and Natasha T. Williams. 2014*. Are Black Kids Worse?
Myths and Facts about Racial Differences in Behavior*. The Equity
Project at Indiana University, Supplementary Paper I.

Spence, Michael. 1973. \"Job Market Signaling.\" *The Quarterly Journal
of Economics* 87 (3): 355.

Swavola, Elizabeth, Kristine Riley, and Ram Subramanian. 2016*.
Overlooked: Women and Jails in an Era of Reform*: The Vera Institute of
Justice.

United Nations. 2014*. United Nations Human Development Report*.

US News. 2016. \"Common Application Changing Question on Criminal
Record.\" *US News*,
May. http://www.usnews.com/news/us/articles/2016-05-09/common-application-changing-question-on-criminal-record.

US News and World Report. \"College Directory.\" US News and World
Report., accessed April 28, 2017, https://www.usnews.com/best-colleges.

Wacquant, Loïc. 2000. \"The New \`Peculiar Institution\':: On the Prison
as Surrogate Ghetto.\" *Theoretical Criminology* 4 (3): 377-389.

Washington Post. 2015. \"Bill Gates Keeps Pushing Common Core, with Big
Money (and a Bid to Get Charles Koch to Like It.\" *Washington Post*,
December.

Wilson, William Julius. 1997.* When Work Disappears: The World of the
New Urban Poor*.

**\
**

VII. Appendix
=============

### 

### Table A: Variable List from the National Crime Victimization Survey: School Crime Supplement 

+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| **National  | **Variable  | **Question* | **Responses | **Model **  |
| Crime       | Name**      | *           | **          |             |
| Victimizati |             |             |             |             |
| on          | **\[Survey  |             |             |             |
| Survey:     | Year\]**    |             |             |             |
| School      |             |             |             |             |
| Crime       |             |             |             |             |
| Supplement  |             |             |             |             |
| Variable    |             |             |             |             |
| List **     |             |             |             |             |
+=============+=============+=============+=============+=============+
| Carceral    | VS0036      | Assigned    | Yes, No,    | Regressor   |
| School      | \[2007-2015 | security    | Don't Know  | of Interest |
| Index       | \]          | guards or   |             |             |
|             |             | police      |             |             |
|             | VS035       | officers?   |             |             |
|             | \[2005\]    |             |             |             |
|             |             |             |             |             |
|             | V238        |             |             |             |
|             | \[2003\]    |             |             |             |
|             |             |             |             |             |
|             | V230        |             |             |             |
|             | \[2001\]    |             |             |             |
|             |             |             |             |             |
|             | V233        |             |             |             |
|             | \[1999\]    |             |             |             |
|             |             |             |             |             |
|             | V220        |             |             |             |
|             | \[1995\]    |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Carceral    | VS0038      | Metal       | Yes, No,    | Regressor   |
| School      | \[2007-2015 | detectors,  | Don't Know  | of Interest |
| Index       | \]          | including   |             |             |
|             |             | wands?      |             |             |
|             | VS037       |             |             |             |
|             | \[2005\]    |             |             |             |
|             |             |             |             |             |
|             | V236        |             |             |             |
|             | \[2003\]    |             |             |             |
|             |             |             |             |             |
|             | V232 \[2001 |             |             |             |
|             |             |             |             |             |
|             | V235        |             |             |             |
|             | \[1999\]    |             |             |             |
|             |             |             |             |             |
|             | V222        |             |             |             |
|             | \[1995\]    |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Carceral    | VS0039      | Locked      | Yes, No,    | Regressor   |
| School      | \[2007-2015 | entrance or | Don't Know  | of Interest |
| Index       | \]          | exit doors  |             |             |
|             |             | during the  |             |             |
|             | VS038       | day?        |             |             |
|             | \[2005\]    |             |             |             |
|             |             |             |             |             |
|             | V239        |             |             |             |
|             | \[2003\]    |             |             |             |
|             |             |             |             |             |
|             | V233        |             |             |             |
|             | \[2001\]    |             |             |             |
|             |             |             |             |             |
|             | V236        |             |             |             |
|             | \[1999\]    |             |             |             |
|             |             |             |             |             |
|             | V223        |             |             |             |
|             | \[1995\]    |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Carceral    | VS0041      | Locker      | Yes, No,    | Regressor   |
| School      | \[2007-2015 | checks?     | Don't Know  | of Interest |
| Index       | \]          |             |             |             |
|             |             |             |             |             |
|             | VS040       |             |             |             |
|             | \[2005\]    |             |             |             |
|             |             |             |             |             |
|             | V241        |             |             |             |
|             | \[2003\]    |             |             |             |
|             |             |             |             |             |
|             | V235\[2001\ |             |             |             |
|             | ]           |             |             |             |
|             |             |             |             |             |
|             | V238        |             |             |             |
|             | \[1999\]    |             |             |             |
|             |             |             |             |             |
|             | V225        |             |             |             |
|             | \[1995\]    |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Carceral    | VS0043      | Security    | Yes, No,    | Regressor   |
| School      | \[2007-2015 | cameras to  | Don't Know  | of Interest |
| Index       | \]          | monitor     |             |             |
|             |             | school?     |             |             |
|             | VS042       |             |             |             |
|             | \[2005\]    |             |             |             |
|             |             |             |             |             |
|             | V243        |             |             |             |
|             | \[2003\]    |             |             |             |
|             |             |             |             |             |
|             | V237        |             |             |             |
|             | \[2001\]    |             |             |             |
|             |             |             |             |             |
|             | Not Asked   |             |             |             |
|             | \[1995,     |             |             |             |
|             | 1999\]      |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Student     | VS0139      | Thinking    | Yes, No,    | Outcome (1) |
| Expectation | \[2007-2015 | about the   | Don't Know  |             |
| s           | \]          | future, do  |             |             |
| of          |             | you think   |             |             |
| Attending   | VS 134      | you will    |             |             |
| College     | \[2005\]    | attend      |             |             |
|             |             | school      |             |             |
|             | V313        | after high  |             |             |
|             | \[2003\]    | school,     |             |             |
|             |             | such as a   |             |             |
|             | V306        | college or  |             |             |
|             | \[2001\]    | technical   |             |             |
|             |             | school?     |             |             |
|             | Not Asked   |             |             |             |
|             | \[1995,     |             |             |             |
|             | 1999\]      |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Student     | VS0140      | Thinking    | Yes, No,    | Outcome (2) |
| Expectation | \[2007-2015 | about the   | Don't Know  |             |
| s           | \]          | future, do  |             |             |
| of          |             | you think   |             |             |
| Graduating  | VS135       | you will    |             |             |
| College     | \[2005\]    | graduate    |             |             |
|             |             | from a      |             |             |
|             | V314        | 4-year      |             |             |
|             | \[2003\]    | college?    |             |             |
|             |             |             |             |             |
|             | V307        |             |             |             |
|             | \[2001\]    |             |             |             |
|             |             |             |             |             |
|             | Not Asked   |             |             |             |
|             | \[1995,     |             |             |             |
|             | 1999\]      |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Sources:    |             |             |             |             |
| National    |             |             |             |             |
| Crime       |             |             |             |             |
| Victimizati |             |             |             |             |
| on,         |             |             |             |             |
| School      |             |             |             |             |
| Crime       |             |             |             |             |
| Supplement, |             |             |             |             |
| Codebooks   |             |             |             |             |
| 2015, 2013, |             |             |             |             |
| 2011, 2009, |             |             |             |             |
| 2007, 2005, |             |             |             |             |
| 2003, 2001, |             |             |             |             |
| 1999, &     |             |             |             |             |
| 1995.       |             |             |             |             |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+

[^1]: Outsourcing school discipline to the juvenile criminalize justice
    system is an example of the changing role of government. In this
    case, discipline is outsourced from school and to the criminal
    justice system, which is still governmental. But, this changes the
    role of government in this context.

[^2]: See Tressie McMillan Cottom's *Lower Ed: The Troubling Rise of
    For-Profit Colleges in the New Economy* for more information on the
    pernicious recruitment and admissions processes at for-profit
    institutions, which tend to particularly target students of color
    and those from poorer backgrounds.
